README.md, before:

network_interface
=================

_WARNING: This role can be dangerous to use. If you lose network connectivity
to your target host by incorrectly configuring your networking, you may be
unable to recover without physical access to the machine._

This roles enables users to configure various network components on target
machines. The role can be used to configure:

- Ethernet interfaces
- Bridge interfaces
- Bonded interfaces
- VLAN tagged interfaces
- Network routes

Requirements
------------

This role requires Ansible 1.4 or higher, and platform requirements are listed
in the metadata file.

Role Variables
--------------

The variables that can be passed to this role and a brief description about
them are as follows:

    # The list of ethernet interfaces to be added to the system
    network_ether_interfaces: []

    # The list of bridge interfaces to be added to the system
    network_bridge_interfaces: []

    # The list of bonded interfaces to be added to the system
    network_bond_interfaces: []

    # The list of vlan interfaces to be added to the system
    network_vlan_interfaces: []

Note: The values for the list are listed in the examples below.

Examples
--------

For all network configurations, it is possible to use CIDR or IPv4 Address notation. 
I recomend the use of CIDR, because it helps to get a simpler configuration and it
is the only way for IPv6 Addresses.

IPv4 Example with CIDR notation:

      cidr: 192.168.10.18/24
      # OPTIONAL: specify a gateway for that network, or auto for network+1
      gateway: auto 
 
IPv4 Example with classic IPv4:

      address: 192.168.10.18
      netmask: 255.255.255.0
      network: 192.168.10.0
      broadcast: 192.168.10.255
      gateway: 192.168.10.1

If you want to use a different MAC Address for your Interface, you can simply add it.

      hwaddress: aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:ff

1) Configure eth1 and eth2 on a host with a static IP and a dhcp IP. Also
define static routes and a gateway.

    - hosts: myhost
      roles:
        - role: network
          network_ether_interfaces:
           - device: eth1
             bootproto: static
             cidr: 192.168.10.18/24
             gateway: auto 
             route:
              - network: 192.168.200.0
                netmask: 255.255.255.0
                gateway: 192.168.10.1
              - network: 192.168.100.0
                netmask: 255.255.255.0
                gateway: 192.168.10.1
           - device: eth2
             bootproto: dhcp

Note: it is not required to add routes, default route will be added automatically.

2) Configure a bridge interface with multiple NIcs added to the bridge. 

    - hosts: myhost
      roles:
        - role: network
          network_bridge_interfaces:
           -  device: br1
              type: bridge
              cidr: 192.168.10.10/24
              bridge_ports: [eth1, eth2]

              # Optional values
              bridge_ageing: 300 
              bridge_bridgeprio: 32768
              bridge_fd: 15
              bridge_gcint: 4
              bridge_hello: 2
              bridge_maxage: 20
              bridge_maxwait: 0
              bridge_pathcost: "eth1 100"
              bridge_portprio: "eth1 128"
              bridge_stp: "on"
              bridge_waitport: "5 eth1 eth2"

Note: Routes can also be added for this interface in the same way routes are
added for ethernet interfaces.

3) Configure a bond interface with an "active-backup" slave configuration.

    - hosts: myhost
      roles:
        - role: network
          network_bond_interfaces:
            - device: bond0
              address: 192.168.10.128
              netmask: 255.255.255.0
              bond_mode: active-backup
              bond_slaves: [eth1, eth2]

              # Optional values
              bond_miimon: 100
              bond_lacp_rate: slow
              bond_xmit_hash_policy: layer3+4

4) Configure a bonded interface with "802.3ad" as the bonding mode and IP
address obtained via DHCP.

    - hosts: myhost
      roles:
        - role: network
          network_bond_interfaces:
            - device: bond0
              bootproto: dhcp
              bond_mode: 802.3ad
              bond_miimon: 100
              bond_slaves: [eth1, eth2]

5) Configure a VLAN interface with the vlan tag 2 for an ethernet interface

    - hosts: myhost
      roles:
        - role: network
          network_ether_interfaces:
           - device: eth1
             bootproto: static
             cidr: 192.168.10.18/24
             gateway: auto
          network_vlan_interfaces:
           - device: eth1.2
             bootproto: static
             cidr: 192.168.20.18/24

6) All the above examples show how to configure a single host, The below
example shows how to define your network configurations for all your machines.

Assume your host inventory is as follows:

### /etc/ansible/hosts

    [dc1]
    host1
    host2

Describe your network configuration for each host in host vars:

### host_vars/host1

    network_ether_interfaces:
           - device: eth1
             bootproto: static
             address: 192.168.10.18
             netmask: 255.255.255.0
             gateway: 192.168.10.1
             route:
              - network: 192.168.200.0
                netmask: 255.255.255.0
                gateway: 192.168.10.1
    network_bond_interfaces:
            - device: bond0
              bootproto: dhcp
              bond_mode: 802.3ad
              bond_miimon: 100
              bond_slaves: [eth2, eth3]

### host_vars/host2

    network_ether_interfaces:
           - device: eth0
             bootproto: static
             address: 192.168.10.18
             netmask: 255.255.255.0
             gateway: 192.168.10.1

7) If resolvconf package should be used, it is possible to add some DNS configurations

      dns-nameserver: [ "8.8.8.8", "8.8.4.4" ]
      dns-search: "search.mydomain.tdl"
      dns-domain: "mydomain.tdl"

8) You can add IPv6 static IP configuration on Ethernet, Bond or Bridge interfaces

      ipv6_address: "aaaa:bbbb:cccc:dddd:dead:beef::1/64"
      ipv6_gateway: "aaaa:bbbb:cccc:dddd::1"


Create a playbook which applies this role to all hosts as shown below, and run
the playbook. All the servers should have their network interfaces configured
and routed updated.

    - hosts: all
      roles:
        - role: network

Note: Ansible needs network connectivity throughout the playbook process, you
may need to have a control interface that you do *not* modify using this
method while changeing IP Addresses so that Ansible has a stable connection 
to configure the target systems. All network changes are done within a single 
generated script and network connectivity is only lost for few seconds.


Dependencies
------------

python-netaddr

License
-------

BSD

Author Information
------------------

based on role from Benno Joy

Improvements from some other GIT Forks

Debian Upgrades by Martin Verges, First Colo GmbH

Commit message:

Debian: add support for custom options

README.md, after:

network_interface
=================

_WARNING: This role can be dangerous to use. If you lose network connectivity
to your target host by incorrectly configuring your networking, you may be
unable to recover without physical access to the machine._

This roles enables users to configure various network components on target
machines. The role can be used to configure:

- Ethernet interfaces
- Bridge interfaces
- Bonded interfaces
- VLAN tagged interfaces
- Network routes

Requirements
------------

This role requires Ansible 1.4 or higher, and platform requirements are listed
in the metadata file.

Role Variables
--------------

The variables that can be passed to this role and a brief description about
them are as follows:

    # The list of ethernet interfaces to be added to the system
    network_ether_interfaces: []

    # The list of bridge interfaces to be added to the system
    network_bridge_interfaces: []

    # The list of bonded interfaces to be added to the system
    network_bond_interfaces: []

    # The list of vlan interfaces to be added to the system
    network_vlan_interfaces: []

Note: The values for the list are listed in the examples below.

Examples
--------

For all network configurations, it is possible to use CIDR or IPv4 Address notation. 
I recomend the use of CIDR, because it helps to get a simpler configuration and it
is the only way for IPv6 Addresses.

IPv4 Example with CIDR notation:

      cidr: 192.168.10.18/24
      # OPTIONAL: specify a gateway for that network, or auto for network+1
      gateway: auto 
 
IPv4 Example with classic IPv4:

      address: 192.168.10.18
      netmask: 255.255.255.0
      network: 192.168.10.0
      broadcast: 192.168.10.255
      gateway: 192.168.10.1

If you want to use a different MAC Address for your Interface, you can simply add it.

      hwaddress: aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:ff

On some rare occasion it might be good to set whatever option you like. Therefore it 
is possible to use

      options:
          - "up /execute/my/command"
          - "down /execute/my/other/command"

and the IPv6 version 

      ipv6_options:
          - "up /execute/my/command"
          - "down /execute/my/other/command"


1) Configure eth1 and eth2 on a host with a static IP and a dhcp IP. Also
define static routes and a gateway.

    - hosts: myhost
      roles:
        - role: network
          network_ether_interfaces:
           - device: eth1
             bootproto: static
             cidr: 192.168.10.18/24
             gateway: auto 
             route:
              - network: 192.168.200.0
                netmask: 255.255.255.0
                gateway: 192.168.10.1
              - network: 192.168.100.0
                netmask: 255.255.255.0
                gateway: 192.168.10.1
           - device: eth2
             bootproto: dhcp

Note: it is not required to add routes, default route will be added automatically.

2) Configure a bridge interface with multiple NIcs added to the bridge. 

    - hosts: myhost
      roles:
        - role: network
          network_bridge_interfaces:
           -  device: br1
              type: bridge
              cidr: 192.168.10.10/24
              bridge_ports: [eth1, eth2]

              # Optional values
              bridge_ageing: 300 
              bridge_bridgeprio: 32768
              bridge_fd: 15
              bridge_gcint: 4
              bridge_hello: 2
              bridge_maxage: 20
              bridge_maxwait: 0
              bridge_pathcost: "eth1 100"
              bridge_portprio: "eth1 128"
              bridge_stp: "on"
              bridge_waitport: "5 eth1 eth2"

Note: Routes can also be added for this interface in the same way routes are
added for ethernet interfaces.

3) Configure a bond interface with an "active-backup" slave configuration.

    - hosts: myhost
      roles:
        - role: network
          network_bond_interfaces:
            - device: bond0
              address: 192.168.10.128
              netmask: 255.255.255.0
              bond_mode: active-backup
              bond_slaves: [eth1, eth2]

              # Optional values
              bond_miimon: 100
              bond_lacp_rate: slow
              bond_xmit_hash_policy: layer3+4

4) Configure a bonded interface with "802.3ad" as the bonding mode and IP
address obtained via DHCP.

    - hosts: myhost
      roles:
        - role: network
          network_bond_interfaces:
            - device: bond0
              bootproto: dhcp
              bond_mode: 802.3ad
              bond_miimon: 100
              bond_slaves: [eth1, eth2]

5) Configure a VLAN interface with the vlan tag 2 for an ethernet interface

    - hosts: myhost
      roles:
        - role: network
          network_ether_interfaces:
           - device: eth1
             bootproto: static
             cidr: 192.168.10.18/24
             gateway: auto
          network_vlan_interfaces:
           - device: eth1.2
             bootproto: static
             cidr: 192.168.20.18/24

6) All the above examples show how to configure a single host, The below
example shows how to define your network configurations for all your machines.

Assume your host inventory is as follows:

### /etc/ansible/hosts

    [dc1]
    host1
    host2

Describe your network configuration for each host in host vars:

### host_vars/host1

    network_ether_interfaces:
           - device: eth1
             bootproto: static
             address: 192.168.10.18
             netmask: 255.255.255.0
             gateway: 192.168.10.1
             route:
              - network: 192.168.200.0
                netmask: 255.255.255.0
                gateway: 192.168.10.1
    network_bond_interfaces:
            - device: bond0
              bootproto: dhcp
              bond_mode: 802.3ad
              bond_miimon: 100
              bond_slaves: [eth2, eth3]

### host_vars/host2

    network_ether_interfaces:
           - device: eth0
             bootproto: static
             address: 192.168.10.18
             netmask: 255.255.255.0
             gateway: 192.168.10.1

7) If resolvconf package should be used, it is possible to add some DNS configurations

      dns-nameserver: [ "8.8.8.8", "8.8.4.4" ]
      dns-search: "search.mydomain.tdl"
      dns-domain: "mydomain.tdl"

8) You can add IPv6 static IP configuration on Ethernet, Bond or Bridge interfaces

      ipv6_address: "aaaa:bbbb:cccc:dddd:dead:beef::1/64"
      ipv6_gateway: "aaaa:bbbb:cccc:dddd::1"


Create a playbook which applies this role to all hosts as shown below, and run
the playbook. All the servers should have their network interfaces configured
and routed updated.

    - hosts: all
      roles:
        - role: network

Note: Ansible needs network connectivity throughout the playbook process, you
may need to have a control interface that you do *not* modify using this
method while changeing IP Addresses so that Ansible has a stable connection 
to configure the target systems. All network changes are done within a single 
generated script and network connectivity is only lost for few seconds.


Dependencies
------------

python-netaddr

License
-------

BSD

Author Information
------------------

based on role from Benno Joy

Improvements from some other GIT Forks

Debian Upgrades by Martin Verges, First Colo GmbH
